# Nuclear Energy Project

## Summary

I analysed data on nuclear energy generation and use since 1985 to identify trends in nuclear energy. I used a Kaggle dataset and cleaned the data in SQL (see data_cleaning.sql). I also did some exploratory data analysis in SQL (see eda.sql) before visualising the data in a Power BI report.

Relevant metrics I considered included the amount of nuclear power generated by the world, the world's dependence on nuclear energy and uranium prices. I also placed particular focus on the top five nuclear energy generating countries (USA, China, France, Russia and South Korea) as key players in the global nuclear industry.

The main finding of this report is that the importance of nuclear energy has declined significantly throughout the 21st century. In 1996, the world's dependence on nuclear energy peaked at 17.44 % of total energy generation. This has since declined to just 9.11 % in 2023. The relationship between this decline and uranium prices is explored further below.

## Background

Nuclear power has, for decades, been an important source of energy for humanity. This project explores trends in the world's nuclear generation since 1985 to track the importance of nuclear energy over the years. In particular, the data relates to the world's nuclear generation and dependence on nuclear power as well as uranium prices.

## Part 1 - Data Cleaning in SQL

I used MySQL to clean the initial data. This mostly involved writing queries to check for duplicates or remove unnecessary data. I also had to handle null values in some datasets since data was not always available for every year since 1985. Furthermore, I made backups of the original data so that I would be able to retrieve the original tables if necessary.

## Part 2 - Exploratory Data Analysis in SQL

Here, I identified the big five nuclear energy producers and looked at long-term trends for nuclear generation and nuclear dependence. I also explored results regarding the United States's nuclear industry in particular, but decided to leave this out of the final report as I wanted to adopt a more global focus.

In particular, the most important result is that the world's nuclear dependence increased from 1985 to 1996, peaking at 17.44% before declining steadily to 9.11% by 2023. Between 2002 and 2011, US uranium prices skyrocketed from 10.36 USD/lb to 55.64 USD/lb by 2011. Prices declined until 2020 when they started to rise again, currently sitting at 43.80 USD/lb. Among the major producers, the US's nuclear dependence has remained virtually constant throughout the last twenty-five years while France's has declined. The other major producers have all increased their dependence on nuclear, especially China which has increased its nuclear generation from 16.74 TWh to 434.72 TWh (an almost 2500% increase) between 2000 and 2023.

## Part 3 - Power BI Report

After identifying the trends I wanted to discuss, I decided to create a Power BI report to visualise my results. The first page of my report focusses on the role of the big five global nuclear producers and the changes in nuclear generation over time. The line and bar graphs show these trends while the gauge chart allows users to see the nuclear dependence of the world in a given year.

The second page of the report is a filled world map indicating the amount of nuclear power produced in each country. The map is shaded in light red (for small amounts of nuclear power) to yellow (for intermediate producers) to dark orange for the largest producers. The map also permits the user to select which year's data they would like to see, allowing for an easy visualisation of global nuclear energy production over the years.

Finally, the last page of the report compares three line graphs: the world's nuclear dependence, the US's nuclear dependence and US uranium prices. This data is useful to see the relationship between uranium prices and nuclear dependence.

## Key Results and Conclusions

As mentioned previously, there has been a decline in the importance of nuclear energy globally in the 21st century despite the fact that most of the major producers (except France where the importance of nuclear has declined) have either stagnated in their nuclear production (USA) or increased their dependence on nuclear (China, Russia, South Korea).

One possible cause of this decreased interest in nuclear is the price of uranium since this is the primary fuel used in nuclear power plants. The price of uranium rose rapidly from the early 2000s which coincides with the decline in dependence on nuclear. However, the price of uranium has cooled significantly since its peak in 2011. Despite this, the world's nuclear dependence has continued to decline until the most recent year available in the dataset (2023).

Thus, increasing uranium prices may have been an initial cause for the decline in nuclear, but this is not sufficient to explain the continuing decline throughout the 2010s and early 2020s. This decline could be due to other reasons such as increased investment in safer renewables like wind, solar and hydroelectric power.

## Further Possibilities

One possible continuation of this project would be to analyse factors other than price which have affected the decline in nuclear energy. As mentioned above, this could be due to an increased emphasis on renewable energy, but other causes could include: the perceived danger of nuclear power plant accidents, concerns over connections between nuclear energy and nuclear weapons or competition from traditional fossil fuels.
